```yaml
number: 15275
title: Migrate renovate config
type: pull_request
state: merged
author: renovate
labels:
  - internal
assignees: []
merged: true
base: main
head: renovate/migrate-config
created_at: 2025-08-14T13:04:06Z
updated_at: 2025-08-26T08:30:24Z
url: https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/pull/15275
synced_at: 2026-01-10T06:44:33Z
```

# Migrate renovate config

---

_Pull request opened by @renovate on 2025-08-14 13:04_

The Renovate config in this repository needs migrating. Typically this is because one or more configuration options you are using have been renamed.

  You don't need to merge this PR right away, because Renovate will continue to migrate these fields internally each time it runs. But later some of these fields may be fully deprecated and the migrations removed. So it's a good idea to merge this migration PR soon. 



#### [PLEASE NOTE](https://docs.renovatebot.com/configuration-options#configmigration): JSON5 config file migrated! All comments & trailing commas were removed.

🔕 **Ignore**: Close this PR and you won't be reminded about config migration again, but one day your current config may no longer be valid.

❓ Got questions? Does something look wrong to you? Please don't hesitate to [request help here](https://redirect.github.com/renovatebot/renovate/discussions).


---

This PR was generated by [Mend Renovate](https://mend.io/renovate/). View the [repository job log](https://developer.mend.io/github/astral-sh/uv).


---

_Label `internal` added by @renovate[bot] on 2025-08-14 13:04_

---

_Comment by @zanieb on 2025-08-14 13:09_

Annoying, it drops all of our comments? Not saving me time that way 😬 

---

_Assigned to @Copilot by @zanieb on 2025-08-14 13:13_

---

_Comment by @zanieb on 2025-08-14 13:13_

@copilot restore all of the comments while retaining the migration

---

_Comment by @konstin on 2025-08-26 08:20_

This should now hopefully be the correct migration.

---

_Merged by @konstin on 2025-08-26 08:30_

---

_Closed by @konstin on 2025-08-26 08:30_

---

_Branch deleted on 2025-08-26 08:30_

---
