```yaml
number: 16452
title: "Added support for [tool.uv.preview-features] in TOML configs (#15767)"
type: pull_request
state: open
author: j-helland
labels: []
assignees: []
base: main
head: jwh/toml-config-preview-features
created_at: 2025-10-26T07:41:57Z
updated_at: 2025-12-10T07:41:19Z
url: https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/pull/16452
synced_at: 2026-01-10T01:57:38Z
```

# Added support for [tool.uv.preview-features] in TOML configs (#15767)

---

_Pull request opened by @j-helland on 2025-10-26 07:41_

<!--
Thank you for contributing to uv! To help us out with reviewing, please consider the following:

- Does this pull request include a summary of the change? (See below.)
- Does this pull request include a descriptive title?
- Does this pull request include references to any relevant issues?
-->

Relates to (#15767)


## Summary

Before this PR, specific preview features could only be specified via a comma-separated list in CLI `--preview-features`. Now, preview features can be specified as a list of strings in `pyproject.toml` or `uv.toml`. For example,
```toml
# pyproject.toml
[tool.uv]
preview-features = ["format"]
```

`--preview` and `--no-preview` take precedence over `tool.uv.preview`, which matches the previous semantics.
`--preview-features` will generally combine with `tool.uv.preview-features` with a couple of nuances:
- When `tool.uv.preview = false`, only `--preview-features` will be used. This allows the CLI to have precedence over the config.
- When `tool.uv.preview = true`, all features will be enabled (technically, `--preview-features` are combined with all features).

### Alternatives Considered

From https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/issues/15767#issue-3402381105:

> setting `tool.uv.preview-features.pylock = false` would disable it, taking precedence over the feature potentially being enabled at a user level. If tool.uv.preview were changed to false, all preview features would be disabled, regardless of the content of tool.uv.preview-features.

I chose not to take this approach because it adds complexity and the semantics don't align with `uv` today. For example, `--no-preview` will currently take priority, even if `pyproject.toml` has `uv.tool.preview = true`. I think driving `uv` from the top-down like this is generally the right decision (and changing the semantics for a small feature like this would certainly not be).


## Test Plan

* `cargo nextest run`
* `cargo build`
* New snapshot tests.

In addition to the above, I also tried a small test project:

### `pyproject.toml` test
From the `uv/` project root:
```shell
$ mkdir tmp && cd tmp
$ cargo run -- init

# Warning
$ cargo run -- format 
warning: `uv format` is experimental and may change without warning. Pass `--preview-features format` to disable this warning.
1 file left unchanged

# No warning
$ echo "\n[tool.uv]\npreview-features = [\"format\"]" >> pyproject.toml
$ cargo run -- format
1 file left unchanged

# `uv.toml` takes priority over `pyproject.toml`
$ echo "preview-features = []" >> uv.toml
warning: Found both a `uv.toml` file and a `[tool.uv]` section in an adjacent `pyproject.toml`. The following fields from `[tool.uv]` will be ignored in favor of the `uv.toml` file:
- preview-features
warning: `uv format` is experimental and may change without warning. Pass `--preview-features format` to disable this warning.
1 file left unchanged
```


---

_Comment by @j-helland on 2025-10-26 08:16_

Some docker CI jobs failing, all due to
```
Error: missing API token, please run `depot login`
Error: failed with: Error: missing API token, please run `depot login`
```

I've checked other recent PRs and I'm seeing similar failures ([example](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/actions/runs/18797165291/job/53638969254)), so I suspect this is a transient issue not related to my changes.

---

_Marked ready for review by @j-helland on 2025-10-26 08:16_

---

_Comment by @j-helland on 2025-10-26 08:17_

This being my first PR in `uv`, I'm especially open to any and all feedback / changes requested (not that I wouldn't be if it was my 500th 🙂). If there's anything I can do to make the review process easier, don't hesitate to let me know!

---

_Comment by @zanieb on 2025-10-26 15:55_

Cool thanks!

Some quick high-level thoughts (I haven't looked at the code yet)

> Passing --preview-features via CLI does NOT combine with uv.tool.preview-features, it overrides it completely. This behavior makes sense to me, otherwise there isn't a clear way to say "No, don't use your config feature X, use Y and Z instead".

I think we should actually combine them. If we get feedback that people need to be able to disable specific features, then the canonical way to do so in uv's interface would be to add a `--no-preview-features <names>` flag.

Don't worry about those Depot authentication failures — we're working with them to resolve those.

---

_Comment by @j-helland on 2025-10-26 16:05_

> I think we should actually combine them. If we get feedback that people need to be able to disable specific features, then the canonical way to do so in uv's interface would be to add a --no-preview-features <names> flag.

Got it, thanks for explaining. That should be an easy fix, I’ll get to that later today.

---

_Comment by @j-helland on 2025-10-27 02:46_

@zanieb I want to clarify one thing before submitting my revision. Suppose we pass `--preview-features pylock` with an underlying config like
```toml
preview = false
preview-features = ["format"]
```
1. Would the final set of features be `format | pylock` or would we prefer to take only `pylock` since `uv.tool.preview = false`? 
2. Similarly, if `tool.uv.preview = true`, should any `--preview-features` merge into that de facto, resulting in all features being enabled?

I would intuitively expect that
1. We just take `pylock` when `tool.uv.preview = false`, ignoring the config features. 
2. Extra `--preview-features` are swallowed by `uv.tool.preview = true`.

---

_Comment by @j-helland on 2025-10-29 02:04_

I pushed what made intuitive sense to me:

> 1. We just take pylock when tool.uv.preview = false, ignoring the config features.
> 2. Extra --preview-features are swallowed by uv.tool.preview = true.

Happy to change this if requested!

---

_Comment by @j-helland on 2025-11-27 20:50_

Nice, no more Depot auth failures.

I'm curious if anyone will get a chance to look at this PR? It would be nice to have this functionality at my current job. I'm sure it's very low-priority, though, so no worries.

If I made any mistakes in my approach that makes this work too time-consuming to review, I'd be happy to take that feedback so I can contribute more productively to `uv` in the future 🙂

---

_Review requested from @zanieb by @konstin on 2025-11-28 08:19_

---
