```yaml
number: 17302
title: Update actions/attest-build-provenance digest to 6865550
type: pull_request
state: open
author: renovate
labels:
  - internal
assignees: []
base: main
head: renovate/actions-attest-build-provenance-digest
created_at: 2026-01-02T17:35:54Z
updated_at: 2026-01-16T21:51:55Z
url: https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/pull/17302
synced_at: 2026-01-16T22:15:15Z
```

# Update actions/attest-build-provenance digest to 6865550

---

_@renovate_

This PR contains the following updates:

| Package | Type | Update | Change |
|---|---|---|---|
| actions/attest-build-provenance | action | digest | `00014ed` → `6865550` |

---

### Configuration

📅 **Schedule**: Branch creation - Between 12:00 AM and 03:59 AM, only on Monday ( * 0-3 * * 1 ) (UTC), Automerge - At any time (no schedule defined).

🚦 **Automerge**: Disabled by config. Please merge this manually once you are satisfied.

♻ **Rebasing**: Whenever PR becomes conflicted, or you tick the rebase/retry checkbox.

🔕 **Ignore**: Close this PR and you won't be reminded about this update again.

---

 - [ ] <!-- rebase-check -->If you want to rebase/retry this PR, check this box

---

This PR was generated by [Mend Renovate](https://mend.io/renovate/). View the [repository job log](https://developer.mend.io/github/astral-sh/uv).
<!--renovate-debug:eyJjcmVhdGVkSW5WZXIiOiI0Mi42OS4xIiwidXBkYXRlZEluVmVyIjoiNDIuNzQuNSIsInRhcmdldEJyYW5jaCI6Im1haW4iLCJsYWJlbHMiOlsiaW50ZXJuYWwiXX0=-->


---

_Label `internal` added by @renovate[bot] on 2026-01-02 17:35_

---

_Comment by @woodruffw on 2026-01-02 17:40_

I don't understand why Renovate created this -- the update isn't on a tag.

---

_Renamed from "Update actions/attest-build-provenance digest to 405d0ea" to "Update actions/attest-build-provenance digest to 63e6444" by @renovate[bot] on 2026-01-05 17:14_

---

_Renamed from "Update actions/attest-build-provenance digest to 63e6444" to "Update actions/attest-build-provenance digest to 98f3aa9" by @renovate[bot] on 2026-01-09 18:31_

---

_Comment by @zanieb on 2026-01-09 19:36_

I think it's because there's no trailing version tag comment

---

_Comment by @woodruffw on 2026-01-09 21:30_

> I think it's because there's no trailing version tag comment

That would explain it, although I thought it would still honor tags only because of our presets. That seems to work for the other action references in `ci.yml` like https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/pull/13905.

Maybe we should just exclude this workflow entirely? I could look again at making a custom Renovate matcher for the dist config.

---

_Renamed from "Update actions/attest-build-provenance digest to 98f3aa9" to "Update actions/attest-build-provenance digest to 6865550" by @renovate[bot] on 2026-01-16 18:20_

---

_Comment by @zanieb on 2026-01-16 21:51_

I think we might as well dirty the file with a tag, since it's already dirty.

---
