```yaml
number: 17377
title: Update actions/checkout digest to 85e6279 - autoclosed
type: pull_request
state: closed
author: renovate
labels:
  - internal
assignees: []
base: main
head: renovate/actions-checkout-digest
created_at: 2025-04-14T03:26:05Z
updated_at: 2025-04-22T14:06:12Z
url: https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/17377
synced_at: 2026-01-12T15:56:01Z
```

# Update actions/checkout digest to 85e6279 - autoclosed

---

_@renovate_

This PR contains the following updates:

| Package | Type | Update | Change |
|---|---|---|---|
| actions/checkout | action | digest | `11bd719` -> `85e6279` |

---

> [!WARNING]
> Some dependencies could not be looked up. Check the Dependency Dashboard for more information.

---

### Configuration

📅 **Schedule**: Branch creation - "before 4am on Monday" (UTC), Automerge - At any time (no schedule defined).

🚦 **Automerge**: Disabled by config. Please merge this manually once you are satisfied.

♻ **Rebasing**: Whenever PR becomes conflicted, or you tick the rebase/retry checkbox.

🔕 **Ignore**: Close this PR and you won't be reminded about this update again.

---

 - [ ] <!-- rebase-check -->If you want to rebase/retry this PR, check this box

---

This PR was generated by [Mend Renovate](https://mend.io/renovate/). View the [repository job log](https://developer.mend.io/github/astral-sh/ruff).
<!--renovate-debug:eyJjcmVhdGVkSW5WZXIiOiIzOS4yMzguMCIsInVwZGF0ZWRJblZlciI6IjM5LjIzOC4wIiwidGFyZ2V0QnJhbmNoIjoibWFpbiIsImxhYmVscyI6WyJpbnRlcm5hbCJdfQ==-->


---

_Label `internal` added by @renovate[bot] on 2025-04-14 03:26_

---

_Comment by @AlexWaygood on 2025-04-15 11:29_

@Gankra I guess we should disable renovate update PRs for `release.yml`, since it's generated by cargo-dist?

---

_Review requested from @Gankra by @AlexWaygood on 2025-04-15 11:29_

---

_Comment by @Gankra on 2025-04-15 18:25_

possibly -- at the very least they need to be treated as prompts to edit the config and regen, instead of things you merge unchanged.

---

_Comment by @AlexWaygood on 2025-04-15 18:45_

Hmmm... I'm not sure I trust our ability to remember to do that whenever a renovate PR touches release.yml (_I'll_ definitely forget 😆), so it sounds like disabling the renovate PRs for this file only might be the best option.

Thanks!

---

_Comment by @dhruvmanila on 2025-04-15 18:58_

> Hmmm... I'm not sure I trust our ability to remember to do that whenever a renovate PR touches release.yml (_I'll_ definitely forget 😆), so it sounds like disabling the renovate PRs for this file only might be the best option.

If it's possible, we could add a CI check to run `dist generate` which should fail if there are any changes.

---

_Comment by @Gankra on 2025-04-16 13:21_

`cargo dist plan` is designed to error if `generate` isn't a noop

---

_Comment by @Gankra on 2025-04-16 13:22_

And the cargo-dist CI automatically runs in a minimal mode that just does `plan` if this value is set to "plan" -- I'm not sure why it was flipped off.

https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/blob/13ea4e5d0e2b05a88e3f488e91bd74461ecd974f/Cargo.toml#L308-L309

---

_Comment by @dhruvmanila on 2025-04-21 19:09_

After https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/17453 is merged, we can ask renovate to rebase and verify whether the CI fails or not and start merging these PRs.

---

_Renamed from "Update actions/checkout digest to 85e6279" to "Update actions/checkout digest to 85e6279 - autoclosed" by @renovate[bot] on 2025-04-22 14:06_

---

_Closed by @renovate[bot] on 2025-04-22 14:06_

---

_Branch deleted on 2025-04-22 14:06_

---
