```yaml
number: 18182
title: Update Rust crate tempfile to v3.20.0
type: pull_request
state: merged
author: renovate
labels:
  - internal
assignees: []
merged: true
base: main
head: renovate/tempfile-3.x-lockfile
created_at: 2025-05-19T05:55:24Z
updated_at: 2025-05-19T06:07:24Z
url: https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/18182
synced_at: 2026-01-12T15:56:14Z
```

# Update Rust crate tempfile to v3.20.0

---

_@renovate_

This PR contains the following updates:

| Package | Type | Update | Change |
|---|---|---|---|
| [tempfile](https://stebalien.com/projects/tempfile-rs/) ([source](https://redirect.github.com/Stebalien/tempfile)) | workspace.dependencies | minor | `3.19.1` -> `3.20.0` |

---

> [!WARNING]
> Some dependencies could not be looked up. Check the Dependency Dashboard for more information.

---

### Release Notes

<details>
<summary>Stebalien/tempfile (tempfile)</summary>

### [`v3.20.0`](https://redirect.github.com/Stebalien/tempfile/blob/HEAD/CHANGELOG.md#3200)

[Compare Source](https://redirect.github.com/Stebalien/tempfile/compare/v3.19.1...v3.20.0)

This release mostly unifies the behavior/capabilities around "keeping" temporary files:

-   Rename `Builder::keep(bool)` (via deprecation) to `Builder::disable_cleanup(bool)` to make it clear that behaves differently from `NamedTempFile::keep()`. The former disables automatic cleanup while the latter *consumes* the `NamedTempFile` object entirely and unsets the "temporary file" attribute (on Windows).
-   Rename `TempDir::into_path` (via deprecation) to `TempDir::keep` to mirror `NamedTempFile::keep`.
-   Add `TempDir::disable_cleanup`, `NamedTempFile::disable_cleanup`, and `TempPath::disable_cleanup` making it possible to disable automatic cleanup in-place *after* creating a temporary file/directory (equivalent to calling `Builder::disable_cleanup` before creating the file/directory).

Additionally, it adds a few spooled temporary file features:

-   Add `SpooledTempFile::into_file` for turning a `SpooledTempFile` into a regular unnamed temporary file, writing it to the backing storage ("rolling" it) if it was still stored in-memory.
-   Add `spooled_tempfile_in` and `SpooledTempFile::new_in` methods for creating spooled temporary files in a specific directory. This makes it possible to choose the backing device for your spooled temporary file which is rather important on Linux where the default temporary directory is likely backed by memory (defeating the entire point of having a spooled temporary file).

Finally, this release improves documentation, especially the top-level documentation explaining which temporary file type to use.

**BREAKING** for those with `deny(warnings)`:

-   `Builder::keep` deprecated in favor of `Builder::disable_cleanup`.
-   `TempDir::into_path` is deprecated in favor of `TempDir::keep`.

**BREAKING**:

</details>

---

### Configuration

📅 **Schedule**: Branch creation - "before 4am on Monday" (UTC), Automerge - At any time (no schedule defined).

🚦 **Automerge**: Disabled by config. Please merge this manually once you are satisfied.

♻ **Rebasing**: Whenever PR becomes conflicted, or you tick the rebase/retry checkbox.

🔕 **Ignore**: Close this PR and you won't be reminded about this update again.

---

 - [ ] <!-- rebase-check -->If you want to rebase/retry this PR, check this box

---

This PR was generated by [Mend Renovate](https://mend.io/renovate/). View the [repository job log](https://developer.mend.io/github/astral-sh/ruff).
<!--renovate-debug:eyJjcmVhdGVkSW5WZXIiOiI0MC4xMS4xOCIsInVwZGF0ZWRJblZlciI6IjQwLjExLjE4IiwidGFyZ2V0QnJhbmNoIjoibWFpbiIsImxhYmVscyI6WyJpbnRlcm5hbCJdfQ==-->


---

_Label `internal` added by @renovate[bot] on 2025-05-19 05:55_

---

_Comment by @github-actions[bot] on 2025-05-19 06:04_

<!-- generated-comment ecosystem -->
## `ruff-ecosystem` results
### Linter (stable)
✅ ecosystem check detected no linter changes.

### Linter (preview)
✅ ecosystem check detected no linter changes.

### Formatter (stable)
✅ ecosystem check detected no format changes.

### Formatter (preview)
✅ ecosystem check detected no format changes.




---

_Merged by @MichaReiser on 2025-05-19 06:07_

---

_Closed by @MichaReiser on 2025-05-19 06:07_

---

_Branch deleted on 2025-05-19 06:07_

---
