```yaml
number: 18270
title: "[ty] Add warning that docs are autogenerated"
type: pull_request
state: merged
author: sharkdp
labels:
  - documentation
  - ty
assignees: []
merged: true
base: main
head: david/ty-docs-toplevel-comment
created_at: 2025-05-23T07:14:46Z
updated_at: 2025-05-23T10:05:27Z
url: https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/18270
synced_at: 2026-01-12T15:56:15Z
```

# [ty] Add warning that docs are autogenerated

---

_@sharkdp_

## Summary

This is a practice I followed on previous projects. Should hopefully further help developers who want to update the documentation?

The big downside is that it's annoying to see this *as a user of the documentation* if you don't open the Markdown file in the browser. But I'd argue that those files don't really follow the original Markdown spirit anyway with all the inline HTML. So maybe it's fine?

---

_Review requested from @carljm by @sharkdp on 2025-05-23 07:14_

---

_Review requested from @MichaReiser by @sharkdp on 2025-05-23 07:14_

---

_Review requested from @AlexWaygood by @sharkdp on 2025-05-23 07:14_

---

_Label `documentation` added by @sharkdp on 2025-05-23 07:14_

---

_Review requested from @dcreager by @sharkdp on 2025-05-23 07:14_

---

_Label `ty` added by @sharkdp on 2025-05-23 07:14_

---

_Comment by @github-actions[bot] on 2025-05-23 07:17_

<!-- generated-comment mypy_primer -->
## `mypy_primer` results
No ecosystem changes detected ✅


---

_Review comment by @MichaReiser on `crates/ruff_dev/src/generate_ty_cli_reference.rs`:83 on 2025-05-23 08:22_

It should only very rarely be necessary to edit the generation script itself. Most changes only need changes to `ty/args.rs`, followed by running `cargo dev generate-all`

---

_Review comment by @MichaReiser on `crates/ruff_dev/src/generate_ty_options.rs`:29 on 2025-05-23 08:23_

Same here, users shouldn't have to edit the script. Instead, they should update the documention on the `Options` struct in `ty_project`.

---

_Review comment by @MichaReiser on `crates/ruff_dev/src/generate_ty_rules.rs`:61 on 2025-05-23 08:23_

Same here: Users shouldn't need to change the script. Instead, they should update the metadata of the corresponding `declare_lint!`

---

_@MichaReiser approved on 2025-05-23 08:25_

ty

I think it would be more useful in most cases to hint users toward the source from where the docs are generated in addition (or instead of?) the script generating the docs.

---

_Merged by @sharkdp on 2025-05-23 09:58_

---

_Closed by @sharkdp on 2025-05-23 09:58_

---

_Branch deleted on 2025-05-23 09:58_

---

_Comment by @brainwane on 2025-05-23 10:05_

Thank you!

---
