```yaml
number: 20957
title: Run py-fuzzer using Python 3.14 in CI
type: pull_request
state: merged
author: AlexWaygood
labels:
  - ci
assignees: []
merged: true
base: main
head: alex/fuzz-314
created_at: 2025-10-18T14:17:34Z
updated_at: 2025-10-18T14:49:15Z
url: https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/20957
synced_at: 2026-01-12T15:57:13Z
```

# Run py-fuzzer using Python 3.14 in CI

---

_@AlexWaygood_

## Summary

Note that this changes the contents of the file each seed corresponds to. For example, when running the fuzzer with Python 3.13, it identifies that ty panics on seed 289, but this isn't the case when running the fuzzer with Python 3.14, because the contents of the file generated by seed 289 are different when running with Python 3.14. When running the fuzzer with Python 3.14, in fact, ty no longer panics on any of seeds 0-500 -- so I bumped the range of seeds we fuzz ty with to 0-1000 range. This means that there is still one seed that ty panics on (692).

Possibly the Python version used here could also be bumped, but I'd rather not touch the release workflow unless it's absolutely necessary, given how many times I've broken it in the past 😆:

https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/blob/68c1fa86c8d18801f3cfc943d6f16a78e745dda2/.github/workflows/build-binaries.yml#L31

## Test Plan

CI on this PR


---

_Label `ci` added by @AlexWaygood on 2025-10-18 14:17_

---

_@MichaReiser approved on 2025-10-18 14:35_

---

_Marked ready for review by @AlexWaygood on 2025-10-18 14:42_

---

_Merged by @AlexWaygood on 2025-10-18 14:42_

---

_Closed by @AlexWaygood on 2025-10-18 14:42_

---

_Comment by @github-actions[bot] on 2025-10-18 14:45_

<!-- generated-comment ecosystem -->
## `ruff-ecosystem` results
### Linter (stable)
✅ ecosystem check detected no linter changes.

### Linter (preview)
✅ ecosystem check detected no linter changes.

### Formatter (stable)
✅ ecosystem check detected no format changes.

### Formatter (preview)
✅ ecosystem check detected no format changes.




---

_Branch deleted on 2025-10-18 14:49_

---
