```yaml
number: 2469
title: "DOC: Make UP006 easier to find"
type: pull_request
state: closed
author: MartinThoma
labels: []
assignees: []
base: main
head: doc-up006
created_at: 2023-02-02T05:00:17Z
updated_at: 2023-02-02T13:01:41Z
url: https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/2469
synced_at: 2026-01-12T04:52:00Z
```

# DOC: Make UP006 easier to find

---

_Pull request opened by @MartinThoma on 2023-02-02 05:00_

This change makes it easier to understand what UP006 is about. It also makes it easier  to find the rule when you only know the effect, but not the PEP.

---

_Comment by @not-my-profile on 2023-02-02 05:21_

These Markdown tables in the README are autogenerated from our format strings in the Rust code and we don't want to change that format string to ``Use `dict` / `list` instead of `typing.Dict / typing.List` for type annotations`` since it would make the actual error messages less descriptive.

You are correct to note that the error format strings often aren't easy to understand. However we want to address this by introducing more thorough documentation #1467, rather than hardcoding specific values in our format strings.

---

_Comment by @MartinThoma on 2023-02-02 06:34_

Makes sense to me :-) I'm closing this as it's included in #1467. However, #1467 is pretty general. It would be nice to doc a single example rule well and then let the community help with following that example

---

_Closed by @MartinThoma on 2023-02-02 06:34_

---

_Comment by @not-my-profile on 2023-02-02 07:04_

Yes I agree :) However we firstly have to set up the documentation system ... we haven't done so yet since we're currently focusing on other issues but it's very much on our minds and the roadmap.

---

_Comment by @charliermarsh on 2023-02-02 12:57_

Want this to get much better!

---

_Branch deleted on 2023-02-02 13:01_

---
