```yaml
number: 2843
title: "Remove autogenerated `docs/rules/*.md` files"
type: pull_request
state: merged
author: not-my-profile
labels: []
assignees: []
merged: true
base: main
head: remove-rule-md-files
created_at: 2023-02-13T05:45:54Z
updated_at: 2023-02-14T00:34:07Z
url: https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/2843
synced_at: 2026-01-12T15:55:11Z
```

# Remove autogenerated `docs/rules/*.md` files

---

_@not-my-profile_

_No description provided._

---

_Renamed from "Remove `docs/rules/*.md` files" to "Remove autogenerated `docs/rules/*.md` files" by @not-my-profile on 2023-02-13 05:52_

---

_Comment by @JonathanPlasse on 2023-02-13 07:27_

Should we keep GitHub like in the readme and when generating the docs replace the links by `beta.ruff.rs` links?

---

_Comment by @not-my-profile on 2023-02-13 07:30_

That doesn't make sense ... when the files are no longer in the repository, we cannot link them to GitHub anymore.

---

_Comment by @JonathanPlasse on 2023-02-13 07:36_

Ah yes, I only saw the removed lines in the root git ignore and not the new one.
Will it break the links if we add a new doc for a rule but do not make a release immediately?

---

_Comment by @not-my-profile on 2023-02-13 07:50_

Yes after this PR has been merged the rule links in the README will only work for rules that have been released, since we intentionally now only build the docs on release, see #2717.

While we could have ruff.rs/stable/ and additionally build ruff.rs/unstable/ for every commit ... I don't think this is really worth it. I think instead we can simply remove the rule tables from the README ... which I think would make sense anyway ... the README is way too long. Splitting up the README into multiple `.md` files would also have the benefit that the heading levels in the `.md` file could directly correspond to the heading levels in the website HTML. Currently the website contains `<h1>` tags and then `<h3>` tags ... which is semantically wrong, the latter should be `<h2>` tags. While we could fix this with even more post-processing, I'd rather have us keep things simple.

---

_Comment by @charliermarsh on 2023-02-13 22:03_

(Had to rebase, hope that's cool.)

---

_Merged by @charliermarsh on 2023-02-14 00:34_

---

_Closed by @charliermarsh on 2023-02-14 00:34_

---
