---
number: 17019
title: expand tilde in cache-dir
type: pull_request
state: open
author: Mobocop
labels: []
assignees: []
base: main
head: bugfix/16288-expand-tilde
created_at: 2025-12-07T21:56:07Z
updated_at: 2025-12-08T23:45:44Z
url: https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/pull/17019
synced_at: 2026-01-07T12:31:16-06:00
---

# expand tilde in cache-dir

---

_Pull request opened by @Mobocop on 2025-12-07 21:56_

<!--
Thank you for contributing to uv! To help us out with reviewing, please consider the following:

- Does this pull request include a summary of the change? (See below.)
- Does this pull request include a descriptive title?
- Does this pull request include references to any relevant issues?
-->

## Summary

<!-- What's the purpose of the change? What does it do, and why? -->
fixes https://github.com/astral-sh/uv/issues/16288 (I believe that this is a bug, and not an enhancement as stated on the ticket)

The special character `~` was not being expanded for `cache-dir` (both CLI and from pyproject.toml and uv.toml). This had different behaviour on Windows and Linux. 
* On Windows it made a directory called `~` which was used as the cache dir
* On Linux it made a directory called `~` which remained empty and the ~ was expanded to make the cache directory

The issue is easily reproduced by installing running uv with a specified cache-dir containing a "~", e.g.
`uv pip install uv --cache-dir="~/.cache/uv"`

This issue is not present in ruff, ([implementation here](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/blob/ef45c97dab2e1ab8268308a53e6dd452db40b0db/crates/ruff_server/src/logging.rs#L18-L29)) who use the [shellexpand](https://crates.io/crates/shellexpand) crate to expand the paths

In this PR I have implemented path expansion (as implemented in ruff) into uv for the cache-dir

## Test Plan

<!-- How was it tested? -->
I have tested that this fix works on Linux (Ubuntu 24.04) and on Windows 10 (22H2)


---

_Converted to draft by @Mobocop on 2025-12-07 22:01_

---

_Comment by @Mobocop on 2025-12-07 22:02_

Apparently I failed the CI. I'll look into it before marking this ready.

---

_Marked ready for review by @Mobocop on 2025-12-07 22:37_

---

_Comment by @zanieb on 2025-12-08 12:41_

If we're going to expand `~` in user-provided paths we'll need to do so everywhere consistently, not just for `cache-dir`.

---

_Comment by @zanieb on 2025-12-08 12:41_

I'm not sure if there are any serious downsides / implications to doing so, we probably need consensus on that first.

Can you point to the commit in Ruff that added support for this?

cc @woodruffw / @konstin 

---

_Comment by @konstin on 2025-12-08 14:26_

I agree that `~` sounds good, but we need to do it consistently - It's more complex than treating it as just a bugfix in one location I'm afraid. For example if we only changes the `cache-dir`, users would get confused why `cache-dir` works with the tilde but other path-based configuration doesn't.

I wouldn't expand env vars (`shellexpand::full`), just tildes. We already support env vars for changing the cache, and I'd like to keep the complexity from string interpolation to a minimum, and there exist real paths with a `$` in them. An open question is where exactly we support tildes, and how we handle tilde-created paths in lockfile if we support such options too: For example, would an index path be stored with `~/path/to/index` in the lockfile?

---

_Referenced in [astral-sh/uv#16982](../../astral-sh/uv/issues/16982.md) on 2025-12-08 15:45_

---

_Comment by @Mobocop on 2025-12-08 21:35_

> If we're going to expand `~` in user-provided paths we'll need to do so everywhere consistently, not just for `cache-dir`.

I completely agree. If you (or someone) can point me at the variables to be expanded I don't mind giving it a go.

> Can you point to the commit in Ruff that added support for this?

The cache_dir in ruff has always expanded paths fully: https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/1351

Digging back through the source, I think this is the first issue which raises shell expansion issue (and associated PR), where the issue was actually raised to support environment variables:
Issue - https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/issues/1316
PR - https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/pull/1323

> I wouldn't expand env vars (`shellexpand::full`), just tildes. We already support env vars for changing the cache, and I'd like to keep the complexity from string interpolation to a minimum, and there exist real paths with a `$` in them. An open question is where exactly we support tildes, and how we handle tilde-created paths in lockfile if we support such options too: For example, would an index path be stored with `~/path/to/index` in the lockfile?

I don't mind what you want implemented. `shellexpand::full` would be consistent with ruff.

I've never seen a path with a "$" in it which was not a variable, but even if there is one I thought that a shell would require it to be escaped. Having said that, using this branch I have tested (Ubunutu 20.04) "$" in the cache directory name. Both
`uv pip install uv --cache-dir="$"`
and 
`uv pip install uv --cache-dir="./\$/"`
worked by creating/using the folder named "$" as the cache-dir (not that I would ever recommend doing this).

I don't have an answer to the lockfile question, I would assume you would want an absolute/expanded path, so that your lockfile is more "locked"?

---

_Comment by @woodruffw on 2025-12-08 23:45_

I might be an outlier here, but I think that behavior (expanding variables, not just tilde) is pretty astonishing and should arguably be limited/removed in ruff too 😅 

---
